python:python is the high level, interpreted, interactive,
object oriented prgraming language. it has invented 
by geodio van rossum and developed by python software foundation in the year of 1991. 
the name python was came from bbc channel in the channel
there is the program python curcus it came from there.

Applications:
used in embended systems.
machine learning.
deep learning.
data scientist.
data analysis.
data engineering.
nlp.
web development.
data visualization.etc.,

advantages:
pyton is easy to learn.
the syntax is very simple.
it is free and open source.
it is high level language.
it is integrated and portable language.
it is dynamically typed language.

disadvantages:
it is slow.
runtime errors.
week at mobile computation.

data types: the type of data that the variable holds is 
known as data type.
for example: a=10 ("so it is integer datatype")

datatypes:they are five types of datatypes 
1)numeric datatype
2)sequence datatype
3)set 
4)dictinary
5)boolean

1)Numeric datatype:
   i)integer: having no decimal point
   ii)float: having decimal point
   iii)complex:real part(perfect fruit) + imaginary part(fruit but perticularly we can include just like some confusing)
2)sequence datatype:
   i)string
   ii)list
   iii)tuple
string:The collection of characters enclosed within single quotes,or double quotes,thrible quotes.
 string is it immutable, 
 single quotes will not override(') so that time we use double quotes
 thrible quotes used to override('') quotes
 string methods:
 i)startswith():it returns true if string starts with the given letter. var.startswith("a")
 ii)endswith():it return true if string ends with the given string var.endswith("..")
 iii)find():it return index where the letter located in the index
 iv)count():it return count of the letter number times reapeated
 v)repeat():
 vi)isalpha():if returns true if the string contains only alphabets
 vii)isalnum():it returns true if the string contains both alphabets and digits
 viii)isnum():it ruturns true if the string contains numbers
 ix)upper():it converts lower case stirng to upper case
 x)lower():it converts upper case stirng to lower case
 xi)strip():it ignores the spaces both sides of the stirngs
 xii)lstrip():it ignores the spaces in the left side
 xiii)rstrip():it ignores the spaces in the right side of the string

list:array the collection of elements of same homogeneous with unique name is known as array
list the collection of different types of data elements is knowns as list
list is mutable
list defined with square brackets

list methods:
append():by using appends() we can add elements at the end of the list
        ->if you want we add mutiple elemets then you can send in the form of list,tuple,dict,tupe.
insert(): we can add elements at the perticualar index
extend(): we can add multiple elements at end end of the list individually
index(): it return index of that elements
copy():it will copy elements from one list to another list but memory 
clear():it return the empty string
remove():it will remove spacific elememt by the passing the element inside the remove methods
pop():it will remove the element by the passing the index on the methods
count():number of time the the element reapeated

tuple:same as list.
but tuple is immutable.
tuple methods:
index():
count():

dictinary:it is nothing but key value pairs.
keys must be unique and values it allow duplicates
it is mutable
it is defined with opening and closing brases
index is not allowed
slicing is not allowed
order is not preserved

dictinary methods:
keys():
values():
items():
update():
copy():
clear():
get():

set: it is defined with set constructor
it is defined with brackets
order is not preserved
slicing is not allowed
duplicates are not allowed

boolean:returns true or false

control statements:
1)decision making statements or conditional statements
2)looping statements or iterative statements
3)jumping statements or transfer statements
1)decision making statemens or conditonal statements
i)simple if statements
ii)if-else statements 
iii)if elif esle statements
iv)short hand if statements
v)short hand if-else statements
vi)nested if
2)iterative statements or looping statements
i)for looping
ii)while looping
3)jumping statements or transfer statements
i)break
ii)continue
iii)pass
1)simple if:
if the given condition is currect then if block statements will be executed
else free statements will be executed
ii)if-else:
if the given conditon is currect then if block statements will 
be executed else else block statements will be executed
iii)if-elif-else:
if the given condition is correct then if block statements will be 
executed else elif block statements will be executed else 
iv)short hand if:writing if statement in single line

loop statements:
for loop:if you know number of iterations then you go for for loop
while loop:if you dont know no.of iterations then you go for while loop

jumping statements or transfer statements:
break: if the given condition is true then it terminates the loop
contionue: if the given condition is true then if skips the present statement and moves the another statements
pass: it just excapes the present statements

variable: a variable is like continer it stores data
identifier is a name given datavalue 
it may be variable, function, class etc.,
rules:
it contains alphabets, digits, underscore.
it cannot starts with digits and special symbols
white spaces are not allowed
keywors or reserved words cannot be used as variable names
variable are case sensitive
  
they are 35 keywords in python:
keywords or reserved words: some words are reserved to represent some meaning 
is known as reserved words or keywords
